Expand "Merge categories and keywords" RFC (#1)
clarfonthey/rust-rfcs: text/3488-deprecate-cargo-categories.md

- Nov. 2016:
  - [Categories are added to crates.io](https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/pull/473)
  - [Discussion on the initial list of categories is started](https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/pull/488)
    - The initial list was adopted from https://github.com/rust-unofficial/awesome-rust
    - A couple of comments suggest using a list of "official" keywords instead
      of introducing a parallel concept of categories (https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/pull/488#issuecomment-265593195
      and https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/pull/488#issuecomment-265623340)

# Statistics

The following numbers have been extracted from a recent
[crates.io database dump](https://crates.io/data-access#database-dumps):

- 40,649 crates have `categories`
  - 3,464 of those crates have only `categories`, and no `keywords`
  - 3,622 of those crates have only a single category
- 61,216 crates have `keywords`
  - 24,031 of those crates have only `keywords`, and no `categories`
  - 4,694 of those crates have only a single keyword
- 37,185 crates have both `categories` and `keywords`
- 56,694 crates have neither `categories`, nor `keywords`

> # Keywords vs. Categories
> 
> **Keywords** (aka. tags) describe an open set of names to categorize packages.
> The set being "open" means that users can use arbitrary keywords without having
> to choose from a fixed list of available names.
> 
> **Categories** describe a closed set of names to categorize packages. The set 
> being "closed" means that users have to choose from a fixed list of available
> categories, and can't easily add new ones.

Reviewer: Extremely minor nit: would be worth keeping the order of "categories and keywords" when describing things just to avoid confusion when reading.

```suggestion
# Categories vs. Keywords

**Categories** describe a closed set of names to categorize packages. The set 
being "closed" means that users have to choose from a fixed list of available
categories, and can't easily add new ones.

**Keywords** (aka. tags) describe an open set of names to categorize packages.
The set being "open" means that users can use arbitrary keywords without having
to choose from a fixed list of available names.
```

Author: makes sense, thanks :)

**Comparison:**

- **Creation:** As described above, the keywords concept makes it
quite easy to create new names by simply using them in the `Cargo.toml` file.
With categories, a pull request to the crates.io repository has to be opened,
followed by a discussion among the crates.io team on whether there might be
enough justification for adding such a new category.

- **Typos:** The chance of misspelling categories is reduced since cargo and
crates.io can warn about misspelled category names. Keywords can be arbitrary,
so a typo-detection is not quite as easy.

  - It would be possible to compare keywords against a list of commonly used
  keywords though and warn the user about potential typos.

> - **Duplicates:** Since the list of categories is fixed and new additions are
> checked by the crates.io team, the chance for having categories with similar
> purposes is small. With keywords, it is easy to have both `math` and
> `mathematics` keywords available on crates.io. In that case it would be the
> burden of the crate authors to use the most appropriate and/or commonly used
> keywords.
> 
>   - This could be countered to some degree by having a list of common aliases
>   on the server-side that are applied either at publish-time or when a user
>   searches for a particular keyword. [Experience from libs.rs indicates that
>   there is no trivial solution to this though](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3488#issuecomment-1721208225) 

Reviewer: My take on wording from earlier comment:

```suggestion
- **Duplicates:** Since the list of categories is fixed and new additions are
checked by the crates.io team, the chance for having categories with similar
purposes is small. With keywords, it is easy to have both `math` and
`mathematics` keywords available on crates.io. In that case it would be the
burden of the crate authors to use the most appropriate and/or commonly used
keywords.

  - This could be countered to some degree by having a list of common aliases
  on the server-side that are applied either at publish-time or when a user
  searches for a particular keyword. [Experience from libs.rs indicates that
  there is no trivial solution to this though](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3488#issuecomment-1721208225) 

  - The concept of duplicates itself is also more ambiguous than you'd think.
  One good example is the endless decision on whether keywords should be
  combined or split up: for example, using "http" and "server" or "http-server"
  keywords. This problem isn't unique to keywords or categories, since there's
  always overlap between different groups and it's never clear where to draw the
  boundaries.
```

- **Clarity:** Categories, as implemented on crates.io, have a description
associated with them, so the chance of misunderstanding what kinds of crates
belong to them is reduced. Keywords by themselves can be unclear in some
cases. One example being the [`cli` keyword](https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/pull/488#issuecomment-265600770)
which includes libraries for building CLI applications, as well as CLI
applications themselves.

> - **Politics:** There are users feeling that having a category exist on
> crates.io can be seen as an endorsement. This makes the introduction
> and deletion of categories feel political to some degree. One example of this
> being a [discussion about the "cryptocurrencies" category](https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/discussions/6762),
> and whether it should be deleted or not. Keywords do not have this issue as
> the crates.io team has no direct control over the creation of keywords (except
> for ones that violate e.g. the [Code of Conduct](https://www.rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct)).

Reviewer: This is mostly being pedantic, but I prefer to avoid the term "political" when referring to controversy since it tends to make most folks shut off the critical thinking faculties in their brains that elaborate on why things are controversial. So, here's a suggestion for a way to word this without using the term:

```suggestion
- **Authority:** Some users feel that having a category exist on crates.io is an
endorsement of that category by the Rust project. This makes the introduction
and deletion of categories hold more weight than they should, and it puts an
increased burden of discussion for all those involved. One example of this
being a [discussion about the "cryptocurrencies" category](https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/discussions/6762), and
whether it should be deleted or not. Keywords don't have this issue since they
aren't added with any involvement from the crates.io team, and thus don't have
the same authority. The crates.io team can still remove keywords that violate 
e.g. the [Code of Conduct](https://www.rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct),
but that's much easier to decide than having to take a stance on whether
keywords are endorsed or not.
```

Author: Sounds great, though I would replace "Authority" with "Endorsement" to match the phrasing in the text: 

```suggestion
- **Endorsement:** Some users feel that having a category exist on crates.io is an
endorsement of that category by the Rust project. This makes the introduction
and deletion of categories hold more weight than they should, and it puts an
increased burden of discussion for all those involved. One example of this
being a [discussion about the "cryptocurrencies" category](https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/discussions/6762), and
whether it should be deleted or not. Keywords don't have this issue since they
aren't added with any involvement from the crates.io team, and thus don't have
the same authority. The crates.io team can still remove keywords that violate 
e.g. the [Code of Conduct](https://www.rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct),
but that's much easier to decide than having to take a stance on whether
keywords are endorsed or not.
```

- **Grassroots:** Some users feel that the crates.io team dictating the list of
available categories can be seen as ["top-down" decision-making](https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/pull/488#issuecomment-265593195),
while keywords are a more "bottom-up" approach, where usage patterns influence
what keywords are shown on the front page.

- **Choice:** Categories can be [easier to pick from since the list is relatively
short](https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/pull/488#issuecomment-265619779),
while with keywords the number of options is almost infinite. At the same
time, having a short list can make it harder for some crates to categorize
them because they don't fit in any of the existing categories.

- **Bike-shedding:** As the original implementation acknowledged, having a fixed
list of categories will turn into endless bike-shedding discussions on which
categories should exist or not, while that time could be spent on more useful
work instead.

# Combinations

> **Keywords && Categories** describes the current implementation where

Reviewer: Same as mentioned earlier.
```suggestion
**Categories && Keywords** describes the current implementation where
```

crates.io supports both concepts at the same time.

**Recommended Keywords** (aka. noteworthy keywords, blessed keywords, official
keywords, …) are a system where users can create new keywords on their own, but
the crates.io team can add descriptions and potentially other metadata to
so-called "recommended" keywords. Such a system was also suggested in the
original categories implementation pull request [here](https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/pull/488#issuecomment-265593195)

> and [here](https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/pull/488#issuecomment-265623340).

Reviewer: I'm not sure whether "recommended" is the right name for these, since it still has the same endorsement feeling that we were trying to avoid earlier. The main reason why I went with "noteworthy" in the original RFC is that it was just an acknowledgement that a lot of people were using the keywords, and less a judgement on whether the keywords were good or not.

That said, I'll ponder a bit on this and get back to it.

Author: That's fair. I meant "recommended" more in the sense of "if you need to choose between #math, #maths and #mathematics, then we **recommend** using #math", not that we recommend building crates for these keywords.

Reviewer: That's incredibly fair; language is hard and there's probably not a great solution to this.

Reviewer: Going back to this, I'm fine with allowing "recommended keywords" for now, but I think we should definitely mention it in the "unresolved questions" section since it is worth pointing out. Will mostly leave it as "this is the name we'll go with unless something better rolls around"

**Comparison:**

- **Confusion:** Having both categories and keywords can be confusing to users
due to the [overlap](https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/pull/488#issuecomment-265593195)
of functionality in both concepts. Especially when searching for crates, it is
not clear whether it's better to look for a matching category or a matching
keyword. With just keywords it can potentially be confusing too if multiple
matching keywords exist, though that can be countered to some degree by
promoting one of them to a recommended keyword.

- **Creation:** One big advantage of the "recommended keywords" concept is that
keywords can be promoted to be "recommended" retroactively
[based on usage data](https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/pull/488#issuecomment-265597304).
Categories need to be created by the crates.io team before they can be used by
any crates, which leads to situations where such categories are not actually
being used and [only contain a single crate](https://crates.io/categories/science::neuroscience).

- **Duplicates:** With a list of recommended keywords the chance for duplicates
can be reduced, but not eliminated completely. Categories have the advantage

> of not having that problem, but at the same time they are also restrict crate

Author: ```suggestion
of not having that problem, but at the same time they also restrict crate
```

authors to only those categories that have been pre-selected by the crates.io

> team.

Reviewer: It's also worth mentioning here that duplicates is also an ambiguous notion too, since two keywords can be "similar enough" that it might be worth combining them when the number of crates is small, but splitting back apart when that gets bigger. Makes me think of the CLI example you put earlier, where in a small ecosystem combining tools to build CLIs + CLIs themselves might make sense, but in a larger one you'd want to split them up.

Author: any suggestions on how to phrase that?

also, when splitting up, it could also be solved by keeping the existing keyword but adding subcategory keywords to it. example: `#http #server` vs. `#http #client`

Reviewer: Hmm, that's fair; I was actually thinking it'd be more likely for people to do #http-server and #http-client since I feel like a generic "server" keyword would be less useful.

I'll think more about this and get back to you.

Reviewer: Added suggestion on newer version of this point.

> - **Clarity:** Similar to reducing the number of duplicates, having a list of
> recommended keywords with associated descriptions can help improve clarity
> on which crates should be labeled with certain keywords. The same applies to
> categories as well.

Reviewer: This sentence felt a bit weird to me -- here's my take on it, and we can probably meet in the middle somewhere.

```suggestion
- **Clarity:** In addition to having a list of recommending keywords to choose
from, providing descriptions alongside those keywords helps users decide which
crates should be labeled with those keywords too. The same applies to categories
as well.
```

> - **Politics:** As discussed above, the introduction of a category is being seen
> as a political decision by some users. If recommended keywords are promoted
> primarily based on usage data then the political aspect does not come into
> play quite as much, reducing the psychological pressure on the crates.io team.

Reviewer: Also rewording to avoid referring to it as "politics," mentioned earlier.

```suggestion
- **Authority:** As discussed above, the introduction of a category is a very
heavy decision since it can be seen as an endorsement from the Rust project
itself. If keywords are promoted primarily based on usage data then this
reflects less on the project and more on its users, reducing this pressure on
the crates.io team.
```

Author: ```suggestion
- **Endorsement:** As discussed above, the introduction of a category is a very
heavy decision since it can be seen as an endorsement from the Rust project
itself. If keywords are promoted primarily based on usage data then this
reflects less on the project and more on its users, reducing this pressure on
the crates.io team.
```

(replaced "Authority" with "Endorsement again)

- **Grassroots:** When keywords are promoted to being recommended based
primarily on usage data then there is less perception of "top-down
decision-making" compared to the fixed list of categories "dictated" by the
crates.io team.

- **Choice:** Choosing from the list of all available keywords can quickly lead
to choice overload. Having recommended keywords can counter this by giving
crate authors a short list of keywords to choose from, and only if they don't
find any fitting keywords they can drop down to the full list of keywords or
introduce a new one.

> - **Bike-shedding:** As with previous points in this list, promoting keywords
> based on usage data largely avoids the bike-shedding discussions that happen
> when adjusting the list of categories.

Reviewer: Since this is slightly more accurate 😉

```suggestion
- **Bike-shedding:** As with previous points in this list, promoting keywords
based on usage data means that any bike-shedding discussions on what keywords to
use have already happened by users, and the crates.io team only has to partake
in the logistics of adding information about existing keywords.
```

# Flat vs. Nested

> **Flat** means that there is no hierarchy of terms. A krate related to doing
> HTTP requests could for example use the keywords `web`, `http`, and
> `http-client`. 

Reviewer: Unlike Rust, your arguments can contain reserved keywords. 😃
```suggestion
**Flat** means that there is no hierarchy of terms. A crate related to doing
HTTP requests could for example use the keywords `web`, `http`, and
`http-client`. 
```

Author: lol, sorry, I've been using `krate` too much in the crates.io codebase...

I noticed that my muscle memory was often typing it that way and was waiting for it to slip through at some point 😂

> **Nested** means that there is a hierarchy of terms. The same krate could be
> tagged with `web/http-client`, where `web` is the parent category and
> `http-client` the child.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Nested** means that there is a hierarchy of terms. The same crate could be
tagged with `web/http-client`, where `web` is the parent category and
`http-client` the child.
```

This could be implemented differently as well, but from a purely technical
view a flat list of terms is significantly easier to implement and maintain.
Admittedly, parts of this are crates.io implementation details though.

# Prior art

Looking at other package repositories:

- [PyPI](https://pypi.org) (Python) offers curated [classifiers](https://pypi.org/classifiers)
without metadata. They don't seem to have an official policy on adding new
classifiers, having instead taken the original list [from external sources](https://peps.python.org/pep-0301/#distutils-trove-classification).

- [Hackage](https://hackage.haskell.org) (Haskell) has both keywords and
uncurated categories without any metadata.

- [NPM](https://www.npmjs.com) (JavaScript) has keywords.

- [pub.dev](https://pub.dev) (Dart) has keywords under the name "topics".

- [Maven Central](https://mvnrepository.com/repos/central) (Java),
[NuGet](https://www.nuget.org) (.NET), [Packagist](https://packagist.org)
(PHP) have keywords under the name "tags".

- [Dub](https://code.dlang.org) (D), [Go](https://pkg.go.dev),
[RubyGems](https://rubygems.org) (Ruby) have no keywords or categories.

# Proposal / Motivation

> This RFC proposes to migrate crates.io from using categories **and** keywords
> to using only keywords, with a list of recommended keywords to address
> the duplication and clarity concerns from above. Keywords will keep their
> structure as a flat hierarchy, allowing crate owners to express nested
> categories can keyword combinations instead.

Reviewer: I'm assuming this is what you meant?

```suggestion
This RFC proposes to migrate crates.io from using categories **and** keywords
to using only keywords, with a list of recommended keywords to address
the duplication and clarity concerns from above. Keywords will keep their
structure as a flat hierarchy, allowing crate owners to express nested
categories as keyword combinations instead.
```

An automated migration from categories to keywords for existing crates is
currently not planned as the majority of crates that use categories also use
keywords at the same time, while the reverse is not the case (see "Statistics"

> section above).

Reviewer: This wording makes it seem like categories are going to still exist but be deprecated, whereas the reality is that the existing categories will be ignored instead. I think that this paragraph should say something about that.

Author: ```suggestion
The plan is for crates.io to not show any of the category user interface elements
anymore. Eventually the crates.io server will also start to ignore the `categories`
field for new uploads and remove the existing categories data from the database.

An automated migration from categories to keywords for existing crates is
currently not planned as the majority of crates that have been using categories
are also using keywords at the same time, while the reverse is not the case
(see "Statistics" section above).
```

something like that?

Reviewer: Looks good to me

The lists of pros and cons above already hint at a couple of reasons that
motivate this RFC:

The first reason being the confusion and complexity that is caused by having two
competing concepts implemented right next to each other. This makes it hard for
Rust users to figure out which concept to use when browsing and searching on
crates.io. It also means extra work for crate authors that currently have to
choose both keywords *and* categories for their crates.

As can be seen in the "Prior art" section above, most package registries stick
to either keywords or categories, and only the Haskell ecosystem is also
implementing both.

> Another reason is the friction that is caused by the crates.io team having to
> decide upfront on whether to introduce a new category or not. As written above,
> this is seen by some people as legitimizing certain categories of crates and
> thus being a political decision. If the "recommended keywords" concept is
> implemented primarily based on usage data of existing keywords, this discussion
> can largely be sidestepped, and it gives the Rust community the power to decide
> what keywords should be recommended and presented on the crates.io frontpage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another reason is the friction that is caused by the crates.io team having to
decide upfront on whether to introduce a new category or not. As written above,
this is seen by some people as endorsing certain categories of crates and thus
requires more work. If the "recommended keywords" concept is implemented
primarily based on usage data of existing keywords, this discussion can largely
be sidestepped, and it gives the Rust community the power to decide what
keywords should be recommended and presented on the crates.io frontpage.
```

Finally, having the community decide on the keywords recommendations through
their usage data reduces the amount of bike-shedding discussions that currently
exist when categories are decided upon with very little up-front usage data.

# Drawbacks

- As mentioned above, the chance for having duplicates is increased since not
everyone will use the list of recommended keywords. This can be countered to
some degree with aliases for recommended keywords, but can't be prevented

> completely.

Reviewer: Worth mentioning that this is *also* a drawback of the existing system, since many authors include keywords that are similar to categories instead, and there's duplication there as well.

Author: that's very true. see https://github.com/rust-lang/crates.io/issues/7306 as an example

any phrasing suggestions?

Reviewer: How about this?

```suggestion
- As mentioned above, the chance for having duplicates is increased since not
everyone will use the list of recommended keywords. This can be countered to
some degree with aliases for recommended keywords, but can't be prevented
completely. That said, we already have duplicates between categories and
keywords today, so, moving to just keywords is a strict improvement.
```

Author: "strict improvement" sounds a bit absolute to me. can we soften this up a bit?

Author: @clarfonthey any thoughts on this? looks like it's the last blocker for merging this :)

  - `/crates?category=foo` returns an empty list
  - `/crates/foo` returns an empty list of `categories`
  - `/category_slugs` returns an empty list
  - `/categories` returns an empty list
  - `/categories/foo` returns `404 Not Found`
  - `/crates/new` stops saving categories for new uploads
- [ ] Remove categories from that crates.io database (incl. the `ltree`
extension).
- [ ] Add a publish-time deprecation warning for all crates that are published
with categories.

# Requirements for recommended keywords

The following basic rules should be followed when promoting keywords to the list
of recommended keywords.

1. The keyword does not violate the [Code of Conduct](https://www.rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct)
of the Rust project. (Such keywords are not allowed anyway, but the crates.io
team is not currently monitoring new additions to the list of keywords and will
only act on this when users report violations)

2. The keyword is already used by substantial amount of crates from separate
authors. (Intentionally vague to account for the growth of the package registry)

3. The keyword serves a purpose that is not covered by any other recommended

> keyword.

Reviewer: Would you mind elaborating a bit on why you removed the bit on crate keywords? My thought process was that if people use the keyword `serde` or similar, it would be redundant to rely on the crates.io team to curate a description for that, and instead it would make sense to simply link to the `serde` crate for that description. We could just exclude these keywords from the list, but I feel like doing something with them is appropriate since they are probably numerous.

Author: it felt a bit complicated to me. I'm not sure I understand why we would want to treat keywords that match crate names differently to other keywords. there is also the open question of how to deal with crates that match a keyword but were created after the keyword was already used by other crates.

Reviewer: Yeah, that's fair. I mostly thought of it since recommended keywords could have descriptions, and having a description be "they use this crate" felt common enough that it deserved its own category. Probably best left to a future extension, so, I'm fine with that.

with categories.

# Requirements for recommended keywords

The following basic rules should be followed when promoting keywords to the list
of recommended keywords.

1. The keyword does not violate the [Code of Conduct](https://www.rust-lang.org/policies/code-of-conduct)
of the Rust project. (Such keywords are not allowed anyway, but the crates.io
team is not currently monitoring new additions to the list of keywords and will
only act on this when users report violations)

2. The keyword is already used by substantial amount of crates from separate
authors. (Intentionally vague to account for the growth of the package registry)

3. The keyword serves a purpose that is not covered by any other recommended
keyword.

# Unresolved questions

- Should the `categories` field be deprecated in cargo too?
  - Are third-party registries using categories?
  - How much usage of cargo is with crates.io vs. third party registries?
  - Would users be confused if it was only deprecated on crates.io but not in cargo?

- Should crates.io automatically map submitted categories to keywords for new
publishes? Should crates.io do the same for existing published versions?

> 

Reviewer: Per my previous comment on recommended keywords.

```suggestion

- Is "recommended keywords" a good name? One of the problems with categories is
this sense of endorsement, and "recommended" keywords can have a similar 
connotation, even though the idea is that these are recommended by the
community, not crates.io itself. This RFC intentionally avoids bikeshedding the
name because we could spend all day on that, but it's worth mentioning anyway.

```
